---
published: false
---
Modern software development is much more complex than a few years ago, because its reach has grown, use cases have multiplied and there's basically no business nowadays which doesn't rely on software to function. This means that the demands that the software must meet are much more complex and diverse than before. With increased demand, comes also increased availability and reliability. 

Currently, the best way to ensure that software meets such high standards is by using CI/CD. 

CI/CD which stands for Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery is a process that ensures that any changes made to the code, will guarantee an artifact that will be in a releasable state at all times. This is done in several stages.

Firstly, it's important to notice that a CI/CD setup is usually a software pipeline configured by leveraging the idea of IaC - Infrastructure as code. The idea is that at the root of the repository, a configuration file is added, usually a `.yaml` file, where the pipeline configuration is defined in a declarative way, and, once new code is pushed from the repository where the configuration is defined, the pipeline will trigger and the CI/CD process will start. Let's see the typical stages of a pipeline that ensure the quality of the software being released:

- compile step: in this step, the code is simply compiled and packaged, to ensure that there are no breaking changes introduced in the build; depending on the setup of your team and company, in this step, additional actions can happen, like, generating docker images, updating internal registries with new artifacts, etc. 

- 