With the covid pandemic still going strong, WFH has become the norm in recent times, and, as a more structural shift in the way modern software related companies conduct their business took place, it has become the standard also for the future. This means that there are many companies adopting remote-first work and opening their workforce to fully remote positions, for eg. [Spotify](https://hrblog.spotify.com/2021/02/12/introducing-working-from-anywhere/). What this means is that the opportunities for interesting work have now become globally accessible to anyone no matter where they are within the world.

While this is good on one hand, there are also some downsides for many people. The shift from office work to the WFH model was quite abrupt given the circumstances of the pandemic, and, while some people had no trouble adjusting, others struggled and still struggle with the fact that they are away from the offices and work suddenly flooded their home and personal space and lives.

This can put a huge toll on mental health of some people as they start facing challenges when trying to separate work from personal life which can lead to higher burnout rates and other more complicated problems. It's of high importance to prioritize your mental health while at work, and, given the current WFH that becomes even more important. While the tips on how to do it can vary depending on your job, I will focus on the aspects that I find myself trying to practice when I feel tiredness kicking in or having trouble focusing.

I have to admit that I personally find it hard, at times, to fully disconnect from work, even more so while working from home and tackling large tasks, but, I've seen and heard of people burning out and it is a real issue. Since this seems to be an important topic, I will share some tips that help me managing this new way of working:

### Leave 
